despite what we were told in the West
for decades that the Soviet Union is
Perpetual we have to learn to live
together they're not going anywhere look
you can't antagonize them we just got to
figure out how to work together and at a
certain point Reagan said uh do you want
to know what my policy is for this uh
the Cold War uh some it's it's simple
some might even call it simplistic you
want to hear it we win and they lose
[Music]
right
hello everyone I have the pleasure today
of sitting and talking with Michael
melis and we start by talking about his
book the white pill and uh his book is a
walk through the catastrophes of the
Soviet era the dire hell that emerged in
the aftermath of the formulation of the
hypothetical workers paradise and a
description of of how that Dreadful
system how and why that Dreadful system
came to an end but we also talk about
something I suppose more fundamental if
there is something more fundamental than
that which is a conceptualization of
what
appropriate social and psychological
relations might look like in alternative
to dogmatic and structured government I
I hashed out with Michael the the the
precise reason that
his attention has been attracted by the
claims of of anarchism per se I'm always
curious about dissociating anarchism say
from a kind of impulsive Hedonism we
drag Ein Rand into the mix to sort that
out and uh and come to conclusions that
I think are well they're interesting and
likely appropriate concentrating
particularly on voluntary Association as
the antithesis
to power right power and compulsion the
power and compulsion that inevitably
leads to tyranny and hell so that's the
conversation so I was reading your book
this morning the white pill and uh I've
read a fair bit
of Russian history in the 20th century
and some before that and uh but every
time I reencounter it it it never really
stops stunning me the brutality that was
associated with that regime I mean it's
obviously the case that the same can be
said about what happened in Nazi Germany
and perhaps even to a greater extent
what happened in MA China although
that's a competition between pretty deep
Hells but it never stops
being surely unbelievable to me that
things can go that badly and I thought
maybe what we do here is start with two
I'll read a couple of things from your
book one kind of ideological and then
the other just a description of the
consequences of the ideology so you
write about this burkeman character who
was a
Anarchist uh agitator for the working
class in the United States who had the
what he thought was the Good Fortune to
go to Russia After the revolution to see
the workers Paradise in action to be
deported he was deported by Hoover right
right right right and he said with his
with his friend uh what was her name
Emma Goldman Goldman Emma Goldman of
course that they were
virtually motivated to kiss the ground
when they landed in Russia okay so now
the burkman's talking to Lennon and
Lennon says Liberty Lennon told burkeman
is a
luxury not to be permitted at the
present state of development when the
revolution is out of danger
external and domestic so that's kind of
an interesting idea to be out of danger
that's when you get to have Liberty when
there's like zero danger you know that
happens a lot in life then Free Speech
might be indulged in might right and
indulged in right right right lovely
phrasing he's a man who meant what he
said insisting that quote enemies must
be crushed and all power centralized in
the communist state lenon admitted that
in this process C the government is
often compelled to resort to unpleasant
means but that is the imperative of the
situation right that's the other thing
that the totalitarians always do is that
the situation right now is so bad and
liable to get worse that any means
whatsoever are to be justified now not
only that that if you stand against them
then well all you're doing is
contributing to the eventual catastrophe
and then given the magnitude of the
catastrophe no no punishment could
possibly be severe enough for you but
that that is the imperative of the
situation from which there can be no
shrinking that's lovely too now it's a
moral obligation to torture people in
the course of time yeah these methods
will be abolished when when they have
become unnecessary so that's lovely okay
so what does that end up producing that
attitude in in uh in mere years when
when Lenin is still alive so burkman and
Goldman left the Soviet Union in 1921
with complete loathing her Memoir of her
time there was split by her publisher
into two books given the titles of my
disillusionment in Russia 1923 and my
further disillusionment in Russia 1924
because there were two books worth of
disillusionment and that wasn't nearly
enough burkman's the Bolshevik myth came
out the following year and the two never
stopped speaking about what they had
seen firsthand in Russia warning the
rest of the citizen rest of the world of
the horrors that the Russian citizenry
were enduring and remember these were
people who were hoping that a worker's
Revolution would produce a broadscale
Improvement in the working conditions of
ordinary people so okay so let's let's
uh let's uh go up a little let's go down
a little closer to the actuality on the
ground so this another quote from your
book life remained difficult in the USSR
for years after the Russian Civil War
had been won by the Bolsheviks the
Communists housing became even more of a
concern as rural citizens flocked to the
rapidly industrializing cities in search
of work and food families became crammed
into apartments that had already been
occupied by other families yeah well it
was a Bersa conceit that people needed
like their own space including their own
bathroom right well we'll get to that
right away here and both eviction and
trying to find a new place to live
effectively became impossible well
that's lovely so no matter how terrible
the people were who you lived with there
was no possibility of doing anything
about it some of this was by Design in
keeping with communist ideology the
ultimate Vision was to have homes
without kitchens so that everyone would
eat communally and government run
cafeterias it's a lovely idea assuming
that there's food and that the people
who are cooking are motivated somehow to
cook and decently and that the people
cleaning up are motivated somehow other
than by Terror to clean up and then you
know if you let the government provide
your food every single day and you don't
even have a storehouse or a kitchen then
what's to stop the people who are
hypothetically giving you everything
from stopping to provide everything that
you've so foolishly allowed them to
present yourself with whenever they want
on any pretext whatsoever people think
no one would ever do that it's like yeah
right true True Believer communist
Architects lovely group designed
buildings where everyone would have to
share bathrooms as well part of an
assault on burgeois Concepts such as
shame privacy and
individualism this created an enormous
incentive for families to turn turn in
those living with them to the
authorities for the most spacious of
reasons if not downright lies one phone
call in the living quarter for quarters
for one family for one's family
instantly doubled what's the harm if
they weren't guilty of one thing then
surely they were guilty of another yeah
I remember that from Soul shiten right
this is this is what the good thinkers
in the west think too you know when when
something happens when the government
extends its its tentacles and takes away
more Liberties or starts threatening
people the idea is well if you didn't do
anything wrong you you wouldn't have
anything to worry about we still hear
that today oh abolutely we hear that all
the time it's like I see so if I never
did anything wrong I wouldn't have to
worry about you okay so that means only
the person who's utterly innocent has
nothing to fear right well yeah that'll
work out well for
everyone and if they hadn't done
anything then surely they would have
nothing to fear from the Czech we'll
talk about them right this became such a
commonplace occurrence that was even
joked about in popular magazines of the
time just think Masha how unpleasant I
wrote a denunciation on Galan and it
turns out that Balan had a bigger room
yes very funny okay so what's the end
consequence of this I think this is in
the early 20s this is in Ukraine V Mass
deportation starts victims were about to
be deported were stripped of their shoes
and their clothes taken and given to
lower peasants as a bribe to ensure
their cooperation kulac children so the
kulacs were farmers who actually
produced food that was basically the
definition of a kolac or who could
conceivably produce food or had
ancestors that might have once produced
food these kulak children were left as
Beggars on the street those transported
to Siberia where there was no buildings
by the way and where it was Winter often
often often yes well in Siberia after
all often yeah those transported to
Siberia faced insuperable hardship yes
and insuperable by Design if a village
existed they were squeezed into it
otherwise they were simply abandoned
Without Shelter in extreme cold and
ordered to build dwellings many managed
to do so by working almost Around the
Clock without sleep in order that they
and the others would not freeze to death
those employed as forced labor and
Mining regions faced starving rations of
one bowl of thin GRL a day and 8 to 10
ounces of bread they died in waves no
matter their numbers were replenished by
the arrival of new
deportees and then we'll read this too I
think CU this is where it I don't know
is this as bad as it got probably not
you'd never find the bottom it does
became common this is during the kulac
starvation it thus became common for
villagers to spy and inform on one
another turning in a neighbor for having
a sock of grain might be the easiest and
safest way to procure food for one's
family Not only was there a guarantee of
a meal but there was now a guarantee
that said meal wouldn't be seized by The
requisitioners Who were going from house
to house looking for any evidence that
you might have even literally even a
grain of wheat somewhere on the premises
furthermore those who could not produce
a quot of grain during starvation
conditions were subject to a fine of
five times the value of what the grain
would have been yet another reason to
seize property and savings not enough
not having the food to fulfill one's
quota was taken as evidence if not
downright proof that one must have been
hiding it and if the food was being
hidden then why was it being handed over
many of of the tactics however could
only be explained by pure sadism in some
Villages the requisitioners went from
house to house killing all the dogs and
taking their bodies with them for good
measure fingers would be slammed in
doorways or needles jammed under
fingernails those found concealing food
were robbed of their remaining
possessions evicted from their homes and
thrown into the snow without any clothes
to ensure that the starving peasants did
not somehow steal the food that they so
desperately needed fields and barns were
kept under armed guard the tivist even
came for the tools used for making food
breaking millstones necessary to
processed grain if they took soup from a
hungry family they made sure to take the
pot as well we'll end with this one one
day as I waited in a queue in front of
the store to buy bread I saw a farm girl
of about 15 years of age in rags and
with starvation looking out of her eyes
she stretched out her hand to everyone
who bought bread asking for a few crumbs
at last she reached the storekeeper this
man must not must have been some newly
arrang arrived stranger who either could
not or would not speak Ukrainian he
began to berate her said she was too
lazy to work on the farm and hit her
outstretched hand with the blunt edge of
a knife blade the girl fell down and
lost a crumb of bread she was holding in
the other hand then the storekeeper
stepped closer kicked the girl and
roared get up go home and get to work
the girl groan stretched out and died
some in the queue began to weep yes well
their little walkth through
communism in all of its Glory so you
start your book you there's one line
after that where he chastises the people
online who are crying for the dying girl
and he says oh looks like enemies of the
people are everywhere right so to make
sure you're not even showing sympathy
for this kid who just starved in front
of you right right yeah well one of the
things you know one of the things I
learned from rud extion it's so
absolutely bloody brutal was and it was
in keeping with what you just said was
that once you establish a state like the
Russians established where Heaven is
claimed to rain when hell actually
prevails you can't even admit to your
own suffering much less the suffering of
other people because to admit that
you're in pain is a an accusation
against the state because like well who
are you to be in pain that glorious
Socialist Workers Revolution has has
come there's no such thing as pain and
so then you're in a situation where you
suffer and everyone around you suffers
and now if you dare to admit it then you
suffer more and so there was a line in
the gulags where um one of the Elanor Li
Lipman I believe it's her name um says
that not only did they want to torture
us they want us to thank them for it
yeah right so to even acknowledge that
something is wrong or an issue is in
fact criticism of the state and the only
people who are criticizing the state are
by definition counterrevolutionaries who
not only want to therefore overthrow the
government but pretty much want what's
worse for everybody so when people like
this exist there is nothing that is too
bad to be done to them because they are
monsters who must be uh wiped off the
face of the Earth um there is this line
one the um secret police just talked
about how when you're chopping wood
chips will fly
because his point was it's better to
kill nine innocent people to get to that
one spy because that is what happens
when you have a society based on the
common good before the individual good
they tell you constantly and explicitly
you do not matter we are building a
great society for the sake of all you
are one little data point you are and
your family are completely irrelevant so
fall at best irrelevant at best so fall
in line because everyone else is falling
in line and what makes you so special um
so I I have to tell you I'm sorry it's
just um uh you know being born in the
Soviet Union and having worked in this
was very difficult but hearing it coming
from you and just this kind of arms
length thing is just getting me all uh
agitated once again because it's the
kind of situation that is as Americans
and a Canadian uh almost
incomprehensible uh you know the book
starts with Ein Rand on the back where
she testifying in front of the house on
American activ activist committee and
she says it's almost impossible to
convey to a free people what it's like
to live in a totalitarian dictatorship
she goes I could give you a lot of
details I can never completely convince
you and she goes in a way it's good that
you can't even conceive what it's like
yeah like imagine what it's like to live
from morning till night in constant
Terror and at night you're wear waiting
for the doorbell to ring where you don't
know who or what is going to do or when
is going to do what to you because you
have friends who spy on you and family M
or your family member where you live in
a country where human life means nothing
less than nothing and you know it and
you're reminded of it constantly yeah
and purposefully yes right and where
power has been delivered to the hands of
the most sadistic people you can
possibly imagine who claim constantly
that they're doing nothing except
operating in the name of the highest
good I will correct you because I think
they're more sadistic than you could
possibly imagine because if you and I
sat down and tried to think of sadistic
things to do we are would not be
creative enough as people with the
slightest bit of conscience to think of
the things that they did um in the
Soviet Union and in Mouse China it would
just never enter our heads so why did
you write this book I mean there are
other histories of the Russian of
Russian brutality obviously and it's
also the case I would say that if people
were inclined to educate themselves this
is something we can talk about in detail
if people in the west were inclined to
educate themselves about the
inevitability the inevitable
consequences of let's say a Communist
Revolution there are plenty of sources
to draw from the Black Book of Communism
everything soci nent wrote for example I
mean and books by Robert Conquest yes I
mean we we know this we know this or we
could know it now you know one of the
things that stunned me and I suppose it
was one of the
first what would you say the first
source of insights I had into to the
absolute Corruption of the modern
education system in the West Was that I
taught a module on Alexander Solan niton
in my personality class which was a
secondy year class I taught it at
Harvard and then at the University of
Toronto so I was teaching it to pretty
damn bright students and they were in
the 14th year of their
education and I taught it because Soul
niton was essentially an existentialist
psychologist in many ways he extended
the work that was done by Victor Frankle
who wrote a great book book called man
search for meaning but solit went even
deeper and what stunned me was despite
the fact that we had carried on a cold
war for 40 years to try to defeat this
absolutely brutal ideology almost
brought the world to the brink of
nuclear disaster that
13040 million people had been
slaughtered in the 20th century in its
name that most of the students had
absolutely no bloody idea that any of
this ever happened and I thought how in
the hell can we be that you know what
they say there is none so blind as those
who will not see and so you wrote this
why' you write it you I think you just
answered my question because the fact
that this was the absolutely
unambiguously number one foreign policy
issue for the greater part of the 20th
century that all foreign policy was
viewed through the lenss of the Cold War
and the fact that the Soviet Union has
now not only been memory hold but has
become a bit of a kitchy joke that you
can go to Whole Foods and have like
Russian brand ice cream and they mean
Russian like Soviet erab brand ice cream
and they make little jokes about
it strange it's not strange strange can
be morally ambiguous it's depraved in my
opinion no but here's the strange part
of it is you know is that that's true of
the Soviet Union but it's not true of
Nazi Germany now I have heard that in
South Korea there is Nazi K kit and in
India as well they have Hitler ice cream
and in India okay but here it's been the
case
that apart from the Mel Brooks Broadway
production right Springtime for Hitler
what or that wasn't the production
exactly I think there was a song that
was a song There was a song in it yeah
right that was the only time that I
actually saw like a kitsy kind of parody
was still a dark parody Hitler and the
Nazis are still off limits for for what
would demented Nostalgia but that
doesn't seem to be the case as you
pointed out for the Communist Regime
because we're the good guys and world
wari to and the people we sided with
therefore are the good guys so to have
the narrative explain that we had to
deal with a devil to deal with the worst
devil is too and the fact that there are
many agencies the US government and the
newspapers who are still in power today
that they were the ones who helped to
cover up Stalin's atrocities possibly in
the sake of something that needed to
happen to win World War I but they never
went back and were like guys this is
hardly know someone who is an angel you
know churel and and FD and FDR are
calling him Uncle Joe at Yalta and
things like this there was there was a
huge movement to censor in Hollywood
anything that implies that Russia is
dishonest or brutal or harmful like
there are allies we have to portray them
in the best possible light this is the
war effort so the fact that there isn't
this easy narrative that like wait a
minute you know CU our foreign policy is
always we're the good guys whoever we're
against as the bad guys so to have any
kind of ambig Beauty in that even
historical is something that our I think
our corporate media which is very
dedicated to promulgating Binary
thinking good versus bad good you know
black versus evil is something that
they're very heavily invested in and to
answer your previous question that is
why I wrote this book because I thought
it was insane that something that is
again the number one issue of the 20th
century in this regard is something that
educated Highly Educated people know
very little about but the reason don't
want to then don't want to uh in fact
when Emma Goldman spoke in London um
shortly after she left the Soviet Union
it was all these lefties Standing
Ovation and when she's like this is not
what we want these people are destroying
the workers you could hear a pin drop
they did not want to hear it but but the
other reason what's different from this
from conquest and soulist and these
others books is this book is a story of
Hope because why I feel so hopeful in
many ways about the West that maybe I'm
delusional and that's a separate issue
is the fact is this depravity Was
Defeated and it was defeated in our
lifetimes and it was defeated relatively
painlessly and relatively easily so if
you have that model of the victory of
all these peoples after so much
sacrifice to overthrow these demonic
satanic regimes is I think a very one of
the happiest endings uh
imaginable right right and the emergence
back into freedom of the Eastern
Europeans who are doing well now after
another and this was in the 80s we have
color footage you could watch it on
YouTube but you know this again the
narrative is too complicated for
entities like the New York Times uh to
tell that story yeah all right so maybe
part of it too with regards to the
distinction between the Nazi regime and
the Communist Regime I I've thought this
tried to think this through a lot is and
maybe this is also why we can't exactly
remember it it's very difficult to shake
the hope that there is a form of hyper
organized government let's say that can
provide well can provide what that can
provide period that that there's a form
of social organization that would
permanently um rescue people from the
world of want that seems to be the lot
of man I mean
now we we have erected a technological
Enterprise that has freed us from
privation to a large degree so it is the
case that if we organize ourselves
intelligently that we can push back
against the tragedies of the world and
the logical extension of that or a
logical extension of that I suppose is
that it's something like a permanently
utopian State characterized by the the
Brotherhood of Man right without concern
for creed race or color where everyone's
equal which starts to become a very you
know diff difficult proposition and the
communist in principle offered that and
it's actually in some ways one of the
things that distinguishes them from the
Nazis because the Nazis offered that too
but only for a certain group of people
whereas the Communists did did promote a
universal Brotherhood you know I I've
asked some of my Jewish friends why
communism was particularly attractive in
the Soviet Union to Jewish intellectuals
of the time and I would say it's partly
because utopian schemes of that sort
tend to be more attractive to
intellectuals period but the wisest
answer I got was that that offering of
universal Brotherhood where all the
distinctions between different Creeds
and races and religions would be um
abolished in principle was attractive to
people who' been the brunt of ethnic and
religious con conflict often murderous
for you know for centuries and so we
have this longing within us for the
emergence of something approximating a
paradisal state and then it's very easy
to be sucked into two propositions is
that one that state could be brought
about by organization and government
Fiat right and two that that what would
you say that that organization could
provide everyone with what was wanted
without there being shattering the
negative consequences of handing other
people that much
power with the holiday season
approaching why not include saving a
baby's life on your Christmas list
through our partnership with pre-born an
organization that's rescued over 270,000
babies you can do just that every day
pre-born network of clinics rescues 200
babies as they compete head-to-head with
the abortion Giants you see they offer
an
[Music]
abortion-inducing you can save a life by
sponsoring a mother's ultrasound
pre-born also supports both mothers and
babies with diapers car seats counseling
and more and now through a match your
tax deductible gift is doubled too for
up to 2 years you are offering double
blessings now is the time to put your
year-end write-offs to work have your
donation matched by dialing pound 250
and saying the keyword baby that's pound
250 baby or donate securely at preborn
docomo that's preborn
SL
[Music]
Jordan so see it's a mystery because
you'd think that we could learn why do
you think it's so difficult for people
to learn that the dream of a worker's
Paradise that's predicated on something
like radical
equality almost inevitably degenerates
into perhaps inevitably degenerates into
something so murderous that you can't
even comprehend it because I think it
speaks to the inherent narcissism of
intellectual
because we're the ones who are going to
do it right they didn't have me to run
the sh they had dumb people oh if only
I'm I'm sure you see this every single
day with any facult any kind of
administration any college we're the one
everyone else is stupid but me if I was
in charge of this ship we'd land it to
shore safely and happily and to speak to
why it was so popular with Jewish
intellectual specifically if the choice
was the Zar and pilgrims where you're by
law mandated to live in a ghetto and so
often the police and the citizen are
going to ride through that ghetto kill
and rape not only with impunity but with
the cheers of the populace and the state
and the alternative is everyone's going
to be equal and you're going to have a
stake in making society that works for
the sake of all it's not a difficult
choice to make for this a certain
population yeah well that first comment
you made you know that's so I've spent a
lot of time especially recently writing
about the luciferian intelligence yes
and the luciferian intelligence so the
reason I use that term in particular is
because of Milton's characterization of
Lucifer right so you could think of
Lucifer as the embodiment of evil um B
what's his name burkman Mar Master
Margarita no there's a book um great
Russian novelist wrote a book called The
Master margarita in the 1930s and in
that book Satan himself comes back to
Earth in USSR but no one believes in him
so he can do whatever he wants right and
so so vov is his name it's a great book
it's like a dovian level book it's a
great book but Milton characterized
Lucifer as God's highest Angel gone most
spectacularly wrong and Lucifer is the
lightbringer and he's essentially
associated with the intellect and the
idea the dreamlike idea that Milt laid
out in his poetic Masterpiece Paradise
Lost was that if the intellect attemp
attempts to reign supreme it instantly
produces hell right that it has to be
subordinate to something else now you
make a case like that I think implicitly
in your book because one of the things
that you're proposing is that the if I
think and correct me if I'm wrong is
that if a society loses its foundation
on the presumption of the ultimate worth
of the individual per se which is
something like a soul concept right
right right if that presumption
disappears and it's replaced by status
presuppositions or even by group
identity then hell isn't far away you
know I I just read a book by this woman
Immaculate is her
name and she was one of
the
rwandans who spent 92 days in a 3x4
bathroom she was one of them crammed in
there with nine 7 to nine depending on
the time other women who were were
basically starving to death over that
period right and what happened in Rwanda
even though it was quite a peaceful
State although poor was that the notion
of group identity became Paramount and
then one ethnic group was set against
the other and what happened in Rwanda is
reminiscent of the sorts of things
perhaps faster and even more brutal
possibly than what happened in the
Soviet Union a mill million people
killed in a span of mere months right in
the most brutal possible way was a
consequence of the valorization of group
identity you saw the same thing
happening in Russia right because and
this happened soon after the revolution
is that the the Communists were
attempting to eradicate Bourgeois
individuality and so people started to
be classified and judged by group guilt
and then almost immediately after the
revolution if you were a land owner or
property owner or anybody who' had even
a modicum of success under under the
Zars or your family or your well that's
the next thing you were classified as an
oppressor and as an enemy of the people
but immediately it's spread to your
family even if you didn't own anything
if you had people in your ancestry who
ever dared to own anything which meant
everyone who was even vag Le they
identified success with oppression you
know which is something that we're
trying very hard to do in our culture at
the moment too which is absolutely
catastrophic we're doing the same bloody
things right dividing people into groups
making group identity Paramount
identifying success itself with with
oppression you know I mean now and then
people who are crooked and parasitical
become successful so to speak
temporarily but that doesn't justifi for
a moment assuming that if one person
owns something that another person
doesn't that you associate the first
person's ownership with theft and and
oppression and then of course the
Communist says you laid out did attempt
to eradicate
every single form of private property
whatsoever and the consequence of that
was well we already read about that is
that in no time flat you were you and
your family were being thrown out into
the snow naked for having the tarity to
keep like to literally keep a cob of
corn on your table so that you might
either have something to eat or so that
you had some seeds for the next year
so so again we're back to the initial
problem which is when the evid that this
goes your proposition was we can't
accept the evidence that these
ideological presuppositions go so
starkly wrong because of something like
the prideful intellect people just show
up time and time again they get inced by
these ideological theories and they make
that move that you suggested which is
well if I would have been in charge of
the Revolution with my indepth and
accurate knowledge of the what the
niceties of utopian Dogma the I would
have shephered in the promised Utopia
and why not try again well I think if
you really want to go to the roots it
goes to Plato versus Aristotle right how
do you approach knowledge do you look at
what's around you and deduce things and
draw conclusions so on and so forth or
do you start with your mind and this
perfect world of ideas uh and then try
to force reality to comport to your
ideology and you saw this go through
than to Hegel then to markx uh and
basically the whole thing is since we
know that our you know they called it
Scientific Socialism right that was the
whole idea of Communism is we're
scientific not like this Market where
you have these little shopkeepers with
their prices and you know it's complete
mess and food's getting thrown out we're
going to work scientifically we're going
to have the big brains at the top we're
going to figure everything out turn the
entire country into either a laboratory
or a factory and then when things don't
work out thanks to the fact that we have
it down someone must be sabotaging it we
have the record so you have this concept
of scapegoating because since we know so
again that's the difference between you
know if if my plan doesn't work you know
am I going to look back at the plan fix
it tweak it because somehow the cars I'm
producing aren't working or this
arrogant you know idealistic uh mindset
by idealistic I mean this this concept
which Western don't even understand that
ideas are more real than reality uh
since my ideas are correct the output is
incorrect someone must be screwing up
with what I know is the perfect set of
ideas and you can't twist the thumb
screws hard enough because you're here
to bring a sense of Heaven on Earth uh
and to save your the country and all of
the world so and and Stalin even said
explicitly that the further along you go
in the revolution the more brutal you
have to be because it's going to be it's
like losing that those last 10 pounds of
fat right it's it's going to be that
much harder to weed out these
capitalistic and Bourgeois elements cuz
they're going to be so much more hidden
so plus plus you have a good excuse then
at that point that for things not going
well because it's only the real subtle
snakes that are left right they're
invisibly ruining everything behind the
scenes well the other thing that occurs
too almost like almost immediately after
the revolution when Lenard decides that
everyone has to be clamped down on is
that the true sadists come to the for
and so that
also raises the Spectre in my
imagination that it's not
merely intellectual arrogance that
produces this proclivity to fall
hookline and sinker for the Communist
Utopia especially the one that that
intellect would be in charge of but that
there's a latent sadism that's
associated with that pretentious
intellect that's looking for a mode of
expression and so you know one of the
things I used to see in my clinical
practice tell me what you think about
this and I see thinking like this it's
latent in your book you're putting your
finger on it from time to time is I'd
have clients who were you know say 35
years old they were often men these
particular clients women have their own
pathology but this this was more a male
pathology these were guys who were like
they're pretty damn Smart
in they they were in intelligent in
junior high in elementary school junior
high and high school you know they were
in the top 5% of the class they
generally didn't work that hard but they
could skate by and everybody knew they
were smart and that was really that
really constituted their
identity and but they never learned how
to work and and the fact that they had
been differentially rewarded for their
intellect in the absence of work meant
that they developed a kind of Pride that
was associated with that intellect you
know and so you you can imagine that one
of the ways of turning someone into a
narcissist is to
reward them for something that's
intrinsic to them because a lot of
whether or not you're intelligent is
more or less given to you right I mean
you can make someone stupider it's not
that easy to make them more intelligent
on the IQ side if you're if you're if
you have an IQ of 145 which would put
you at about the 99th percentile there's
a huge biological contributor to that
right and and the benefits of good
health so it's a talent or a gift and
then you become proud proud of that and
then these guys the same guys would
often be not successful in their life
and that made them bitter because their
presumption was always something like
well I'm so smart that the world should
fall at my feet and then the world
doesn't fall at their feet they're not
they're less popular with women for
example than they think they might be if
if the women actually had the sense to
see what it was that they were passing
up and then that consequence that
consequence of having their intellect
ejected makes them bitter and the step
from bitter to sadist is not very far
away you know and you see also you see
this idea of being toyed with even in
the popular culture so I watched a fair
bit of number of episodes of the sitcom
the big bang you know the Big Bang The
Big Bang Theory The Big Bang Theory yeah
well it was interesting to me because it
featured these nerd type characters
right who were intellectuals you know
they're they're techno intellectuals and
tended to be rather unpopular with women
and awkward and also awkward socially
but they were hyper intelligent and
there is this sense of AG grieved
intellect that runs through the entire
show that's part of the comic Trope but
it's also extremely true and so I'm
wondering if what you think of the
proposition that along with the
intellect that proposes these utopian
schemes right and doesn't like
distributed problem solving it wants to
acrew all the decision making power to
itself because it wants the glory of
doing that for itself and it wants that
for the status and the fact that that
doesn't occur produces this AG grieve
nature that can't help but Express
Express itself in sism because Lennon's
Lennon's a great example of that man I
mean it took no time at all before he
turned in from the like working man's
revolutionary which he never was to a
sadist whose depths were what what
they're they're unfathomable right and
and so quickly well he was always
talking about how much blood we need to
flow even before he got into Power this
is one of the reasons why they brought
him back to Russia the Germans because
they're like once he's there he's going
to make a whole muck of it no one ever
thought he was actually going to seize
power but to your point about sism this
is something I do address in the book
because there was an evolutionary
process so one of the things that the
Russians did as as you mentioned earlier
is they have these things called anot
which are little jokes because you can't
criticize the state but you can make
little jokes about it and get that point
through through without the person
realizing you're being so devastating
your critique and there was one joke
where Stalin was talking to Baria who
was his third and most brutal
executioner maybe not most brutal
competition but Stalin lost his pipe and
he goes barer you know my pipe's been
stolen and then you know barer goes out
and the next day Stalin calls it in and
he's like oh you know I found it it's my
drawer he goes but comrad Stalin we got
three people to confess to it already so
meaning Bar's most famous quote was show
me the man I'll show you the crime but
there was an evolutionary process to
sadism for the simple reason that if you
have 10 people who are
interrogators the guy who is the crul
and most effective in his infliction of
pain psychological physical and
otherwise is the one who's going to get
the most confessions he's the one who's
going to get the most results if I'm at
all a decent human being some people are
going to stand up to my tortures where
if I'm the one who is a complete inhuman
monster who will stop at nothing to make
sure that that person admit to things
which are literally impossible I'm the
one who's going to get the promotion so
the system itself forced uh these people
to become sadistic because otherwise and
the thing is it's not also a matter of
well I'm gonna lose my job if I'm not
being cruel enough then maybe I'm one of
these Wreckers maybe I'm
counterrevolutionary what's wrong with
comrade malice why can't he get any of
these confessions well all his
colleagues can maybe I shouldn't be
trusting you and if you're not trusting
me then my wife and my kid are suspect
as well so you know to your point it
very much the most merciful torturer is
the counterrevolutionary yes yeah right
definitely well also and one more just
one more point because you were talking
about it being an assault on uh private
property it goes much deeper than that
because it was an assault on Civil
Society on private relationships right
because any two people who are talking
are a threat to the society to the state
because then you have the beginnings of
a conspiracy so you the kids as you know
very well I'm sure we taught this lesson
of pavic marov they taught this in
elementary school about the story of
this boy who turned in his parents to
the police because Dad was hoarding
grain or something and pic was later
murdered by his dad and this kid their
statues of him was regarded as valious
and the kids were taught you have to
turn in your parents to the police if
you see them doing anything wrong even
if the cost is your life and the same
thing it became a crime to be married to
an enemy of the people how are you going
to plead in in that case right well you
should have known that your husband or
your wife was engaged in
counterrevolutionary activity cuz every
citizen needs to be vigilant against the
C revolutionaries who are trying to
undermine this glorious scientific
socialistic society that we're building
well then you could see very rapidly if
you think about it how love itself would
become an anti-soviet act because that's
bis love is a very bis value
even precisely but even more directly
like one of the things that happens if
you love someone is that their suffering
is going to hurt you yes and so if you
love someone in their suffering you're
going to listen to them and then in a
state that's already perfect if you
listen to someone suffer you're
basically listening to people utter
counterrevolutionary propaganda right
and so any genuine sympathy between
people that would result in a truthful
confession of personal catastrophe would
immediately be placed in the camp of
revolutionary propaganda and necessarily
this is why ran said I ran said that
it's impossible for free people to
imagine what it's like to
live 100% under the Dominion of the lie
because we can't imagine thank God what
it would be like to be so terrified of
the truth that while you couldn't even
tell it to yourself but but worse
perhaps you couldn't tell it to the
people most around you who most
particularly loved you right children or
or parents or spous houses and one of
the things that I learned in the writing
this book and I'm not sure if even you
know this after Germany was reunified
all the stazi files were made public so
you could and the the percent of secret
police informers in East Germany one and
three yeah it was some crazy number it
blew the Soviet Union Nazi Germany out
of the water as SE ween thought you
point out he goes the stazi were much
worse uh they were Germans they're
efficient so everyone in that country
had to make that choice do I want to
look up what did they know about me and
as importantly who was the one turning
me in and there's this there's a woman
Nam froud trumman um uh who had a job
working in these files and and um uh
when the reporter Road about he goes how
can you work with poison and not
yourself be poisoned so she has to warn
people and this one woman came in she
had gone to jail I think for three or
four years because she expressed an
interest I don't even e either
immigrating or just visiting outside of
East Germany yeah and she looked up the
files and it was the man who
she it it was it was the man she still
lived with and just that morning he told
her have a good day and she's got to go
back home to this yeah and she just
collapsed in as you would yeah and it's
just like again this whole country had
to make this kind of fian bargain or
decision do I want to know and again
Dante put betrayers in the lowest level
yes but these are people who were like
it's been my husband since day one yeah
or my brother or you know and the thing
that was extremely disturbing and this
is something Americans do not get but I
think have started to get with the
result of covid we I I as well was of
the belief that these informers had a
gun to their head and Jordan if they
take me in it's like it's either my
family or I'm turning in Jordan Peterson
sorry sorry bucko I'm turning you in
they were tripping over themselves to
volunteer I saw that in Toronto these
were people who were bored or lonely or
just sad or sadistic or just want to
feel like they had something over
somebody else and that is something that
I I think W that's also so that's also
this attempt to Garner unearned moral
superiorities right is like it means if
you're with during the covid time you
could phone the state on your neighbor
and then you could inform them perhaps
that your neighbor had gone to their
relatives house for a Christmas
gathering and that they were putting the
population in danger and so you got to
manage two things at the same time right
especially if you had any lurking
jealousy whatsoever of that neighbor for
any reason whatsoever maybe they're
younger better looking or or they didn't
suffer as much or God only knows because
there's any number of
Dimensions yeah or right any reason
right any reason and then you could you
could cause them a lot of trouble which
is of course that's quite a lot of fun
especially if you don't have anything
better to do because now you feel
powerful and you are powerful and moral
that's the other thing is because you
can just pat yourself on the back and
say well you know you did the collect
you don't pat yourself on the back you
go on Facebook and brag about it's not
even a self pat on the back then
everyone else is giving you likes and
being like great job you kep me grandma
safe yeah yeah right right so that's the
kind of thing where I I think Americans
don't realize how well we have this
delusion in the west that in a
totalitarian Society it's like the
freedom loving master and there's like
this oppressive guy the the Tyrant or an
impressive guy with his henchmen putting
guns to people's hands all the time and
that's nothing could be farther from the
truth than that it's like I figured that
out in part just when I was reading the
gulag archipelago because solit kept
making the case that there were nowhere
near enough guards to keep the camps
running the prisoners ran the camps it's
like well that's the definition of a
totalitarian state is the prisoners run
the camp and so and in a totalitarian
state and this is what a totalitarian
state is it's not the topdown imposition
of power it's the fact that every single
person
in this Society lies about absolutely
everything to everyone all the time I
was reading the the book of Abraham and
uh in that book God is deciding he's
going to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah
because they've wandered off the moral
path okay and so the implication there
is is that a society can adopt modes of
being that Dooms them to catastrophe all
right and we're talking about exactly
how that might come about and Abraham is
concerned about this because he thinks
well it doesn't seem fair to obliterate
the whole city when there might be
innocent people still dwelling in it and
so Abraham says to God um if there's 40
people there if I can go there and I can
find 40 God-fearing honest people will
you suspend the destruction of the city
and God says yes and Abraham Bargains
again to 30 and I think he gets guard
down to like 10 but can I interject they
there's a part of this story that isn't
commonly known they taught us this when
I was a kid in Yeshiva and I think the
number they starts with a 50 and then
Abraham says how about double check the
numbers at home and Abraham goes how
about five less and guys like God's like
okay but what Abraham meant was 5050 and
you crossed out the five zero so he's
really like all right look I know
there's no hope for this town but if
he's even zero righteous people let's
not kill them all yeah well I mean you
can understand that and you can well you
can also people have ambiguity about the
morality of God as presented in the Old
Testament because these destructive
waves come but to me that's a reflection
of the fact that there are modes of
being that will lead to catastrophe but
the the implication of the story seems
to me to be quite clear which is that in
any society even if it's become
extraordinarily deviant if there's even
a handful of people who don't lie that's
enough to turn the tide or or or or or
stem the flow right because it means
that the grip of hell has become it's
not complete enough yet so that all hope
whatsoever has been vanquished and you
know I think it was solist who said that
one man who stops lying can bring down a
tyranny and that's but what what that
also implies and this is a very perverse
thing too is is that the people who are
in a totalitarian state are complicit in
it every time they agree to participate
in the lie and you know you might say
well they had to because there is a gun
to their head but the thing is there is
a gun to their head anyways right I mean
and I think that's the same when we Face
moral conundrums in our current Society
I saw University faculty back away from
the administration Onslaught over the
course of decades never willing to stand
up and say okay I actually think that
you guys are pushing farther than I'm
willing to go and the rationals were
always the same it's like I will be
punished unduly for my objection but the
consequence of that is is that you're
certainly P punished for your silence
right you might Escape that immediate
catastrophe although probably not
because I don't think anybody escaped
anything in the Soviet Union but the
long-term consequences of abiding by the
LIE are well it's hell as far as I can
tell well a few things first of all
you're not going to find anyone more
contemptuous of academics than myself a
pressing company excluded um so to find
that they are universally weak is not at
all a surprise but to your other point
one of the reasons I did write this book
was because I am so hopeful about the
future and one the counters to that
people are like how can you be hopeful
we don't have the numbers we're not
going to have the numbers and one of the
things as you just pointed out is we
don't need a majority we just need an
alternative if you do have this small
Cadre of people who refuse to give into
the LIE who demonstrate there is another
chance than the path that we're
currently on that is so much more
powerful and punch is so much more above
its weight than you know a lot of people
who are simply ballast and are simply
going to go with with the majority
decree or the zist happens to be at the
moment and we saw this over and over uh
in the countries of Eastern Europe that
self- liberated they did not have the
numbers in terms of organization they
couldn't have or else they would have
been spoted as a whole but Poland you
know specifically with solidarity this
labor movement which brought down first
the Polish government and then you know
was a domino that kind of toppled the
the Soviet Empire it was not a huge
percentage of the population and these
men suffered you know M hardships and
duress but they stuck through it enough
that they managed to win so I think the
issue with people like soulji nsen and
Conquest is those books and the black
book communism you finish those books
you want to put a bullet to your head
yeah and what I want to do here is
you've only written 80% of the story
because the point is this did despite
what we were told in the West for
decades that the Soviet Union is
Perpetual we have to learn to live
together they're not going anywhere we
tried it with the Korean War we tried it
with the Vietnam War uh you know we have
dayon there's two are you there was a
time in our lifetimes when criticizing
the Soviet Union was told was regarded
explicitly as inching us closer to
nuclear war because they regard as a
provocation look you can't antagonize
them we just got to figure out how to
work together and at a certain point
both Reagan and that set Reagan said uh
do you want to know what my policy is
for this uh the Cold War uh some it's
it's simple some might even call
simplistic you want to hear it we win
and they lose right and he was correct
but his entire presidency despite him
refusing secretly to retaliate if the
Russians struck him with nuclear uh
weapons was this commitment to this
cannot I I will not have this power of
the presidency and abide the continuing
existence of this absolutely satanic
evil
empire let me ask you this question are
you a peace with the Mindless screen
time you spend on your phone every day
are you gaining that higher quality of
life you know you desire if this sounds
familiar I have good news starting on
January 1st tens of thousands of men all
over the world will start 2024 with a
90-day journey together in search of a
more purposeful life it's called Exodus
90 and it was built to help men enjoy
the freedom of becoming who they were
truly made to be Exodus 90 guides you in
removing the attachments that are
holding you back from a better life and
it actually works independent research
shows that Exodus 90 men report
considerable shifts after the 90 days a
dramatic decrease in time spent on their
phones stronger satisfaction rates in
their marriages a more meaningful
relationship with God and true
brotherhoods of men on the same path for
the past 8 years Exodus 90 has helped
more than 100,000 men build their own
road map for living with virtue in a
culture that offers far too many paths
to self-destruction so is it time for
your Exodus we start January 1st find
resources to prepare for Exodus 90 at
Exodus 90.com Jordan that's Exodus
90.com Jordan to start your
journey and so what do we do about China
we I listen I I I I know I don't know
what we do about China I don't let's
let's stick to let's stick to one thing
I yeah yeah yeah no no well I guess I'll
tell you what we do about China we
certainly don't valorize them we regard
them as a decent state that should we
don't use them as a model for emulation
during pandemics right we and we don't
uh we criticize and and I think expose
their their tactics and machinations
internally externally as much as
possible but the corporate press is very
interested for reasons that I'm not in a
position necessarily to aine on to
downplay as many Chinese atrocities and
even just Chinese standard operating
procedure as much as possible yeah yeah
well everyone was hoping for a good
amount of time that if China was pulled
into the modern Western economy that one
of the consequences of that would be a
turn towards something approximating
individual Freedom like a gen uh what an
incremental democratization and there
was a few years where that looked like a
real possibility I mean China lifted
itself I shouldn't say that as a
consequence of abandoning its stupider
policies China managed to free its
people enough so that they lifted
themselves out of poverty and then for a
while it looked promising right and then
well and then and then they installed
700 million closed circuit television
cameras and built the world's most total
surveillance State you know the name of
that system is is the same name it's um
the same name as the system that goes
astray in The Terminator series Skynet
Skynet no 100% it they called it Skynet
and the engineers who bu built it said
we're building the good Sky Net this is
actually true yeah I know it's
impossible to believe wow okay I that
wow no no kidding it's like well they're
the they're the Techno luciferian
technologists who think oh this time you
know this time we'll get the the
surveillance State 100% right but they
are getting it right it's in so far as
it serves their purposes yeah well yes
yes and and and it's
drifting quite rapidly into the West as
well you know more and more go through
like I was in the store the other day
that had the ability where you could pay
with your palm right we're getting very
close to the face ID payment systems and
everybody thinks well isn't that
convenient it's like yeah it's
convenient until the centralized
databases know absolutely every goddamn
thing you're doing every second then
they can start putting on differential
tax that's calculated according to your
hypothetical carbon load or something
like that and that's that's a high
probability outcome as far as I can tell
I mean I'm not pessimistic I think I
share your fundamental optimism but boy
the slippery slope slide is sitting
there right in front of us and we can we
could we can take a trip down I don't
think it's a slippery slope at all I
think it's an Elevator Shaft yeah well I
mean like it's it's really just like
that's just the ultimate and slippery
yeah yeah yeah an ult An Elevator Shaft
that's bottomless but I I think the
other thing I think a lot of people
don't appreciate is to what extent
people are again this is something that
the enlightenment I think gets wrong uh
Menin who's one of my great role models
he's a journalist from the early 20th
century he said the average man does not
want to be free he merely wants to be
safe so this isn't being done with you
know gunto head these are people
tripping over themselves because they
would rather be convenient because they
compete on the metric of obedience so if
it's like I'll just do whatever I'm told
as long as I don't have to worry about
anything what do I care if you keep
track of everywhere I go what I buy what
I consume nothing I'm consuming is
outside the median the bell curve
nothing I go where I go is unusual at
all doesn't cost me anything and I get
taken care of I get to be a pet of those
in power if you can understand from
their perspective this is a fair this is
a great market for them yeah well the
the cost is that if you give up all the
difficulties of your life let's say
because you're looking difficulties and
danger of life because you're looking
for security and
satiation then you don't have anything
interesting or meaningful to do so there
is no Pathway to happiness that's merely
a consequence of security and satiation
but don't you think it's a Brave New
World situation where people are
perfectly comfortable just living a life
of mild pleasure none like a orgastic
kind of way but rather than seeking any
sort of Happiness which is beyond their
means I don't know because I don't think
it actually works for people well I
don't think they have the they don't
have the presence of mind to realize
that they're living more moment to
moment they're not having this kind of
long-term strategy a look at their own
lives right the RO the the chickens
probably come home to roost in times of
existential crisis yeah and that's when
people do some soul searching and
perhaps decide that what it is that
they've been satisfying themselves with
is insufficient and then there's an
opportunity for transformation but not
always taken oh well it's it's also C
okay let's talk about that a little bit
because one of the things I wanted to
talk to you about today is know I don't
know to what degree you would still Ally
yourself with the anarchist movement and
I want to know well to what degree you
do and also I would like to know what
that means you open your book with a
Rand yeah I know that's a bit of a
tangential intrusion into that question
but she's definitely an Arbiter or what
a spokeswoman for an individualistic
stance I want to talk to you about IR
ran because I have some ideas about that
that I want but I I'm also curious you
you you obviously regard a focus on the
individual as the appropriate medication
against this kind of status intellectual
luciferian utopianism and I think that's
I think that's appropriate but I want to
know what what your what your vision of
an alternative is and why you why you
adopted that particular Vision well I
don't know that I have a vision per se
I'm not a central planner but in terms
but what anarchism means to me and I I
do 100% regard myself as an anarchism is
it is an approach to life it is an
approach to treating people peacefully
uh it is a a recognition that political
Authority is inherently illegitimate
although sometimes it is powerful um and
it is regarding the our existence as an
amazing opportunity and to live life to
its fullest and to realize that to take
that away from somebody else uh is a
huge you know moral outrage so that is
kind of what anarchism means to me okay
okay and and Rand was asked at one point
she goes if I had to sum up my worldview
or whatever term she used in one word it
would be this individualism so yes that
is exactly yeah so that's where Okay
okay so so let me delve into that a
little bit also just important because
you know burkman and Goldman uh there's
this Boomer idea that more government is
leftwing and less government is
right-wing and it puts Goldman and
burkman on the right wing it's just this
weird thing because they want Hitler to
be a leftist because that right wi is
good Hitler's bad Hitler's leftist that
kind of mindset point being it was it's
very important for me to give credit the
fact the first critics of the Soviet
Union with firsthand experience were
hardcore unmitigated lefties these Emma
Goldman and B men were both bloodthirsty
happy to Slit throats but they're saying
we're doing this in the sake of
Revolution to kind of bring about a
society that works for everyone not
against the workers themselves that we
are championing this is not what we're
for so they weren't you know kind of
this pansy type of lefties they were you
know but Emma Goldman gave a talk in
Union Square and she told the audience
she goes go to the capitalist and ask
for work and if they don't give you work
ask for bread and if they don't give you
bread take bread so she's like you do
not have a moral obligation to starve so
they had this contemptuous why are
people starving when there's
millionaires out there was their mindset
so the fact that these people at Great
cost to themselves and to their status
in this kind of workers movement were so
vocal about denouncing what they had
seen firsthand and were called puppets
of the capit so why do you think that's
important I mean you spend a lot of time
on burkeman and Goldman have I got the
first name yes Alexander burkman Emma
Goldman yeah right okay okay you spend a
lot of time on them and you do show that
they were as representatives of the
autonomous worker let's say they were
appalled by what they saw in the Soviet
Union and you you you're you seem to be
making the case that that's important
because of their stress on on
individualism or because you also wanted
not to you know fall prey to the
delusion that was only the right that
was standing exactly I I hate this idea
that right good left bad or vice versa
there were the the fight against
totalitarianism was a series of dots
that are often completely
counterintuitive uh and I think it's
very important historically when people
fight these individuals who fight
against these kind of atrocities that
they give give they okay so you're
looking at something like attempting to
replace the right-wing versus the
terrible Communists narrative with
something more like people who are
concerned with the individual against
the collect okay fine I see I see okay
so now here's I rate read Rand Ein
rand's books The Fountain Head and um
Atlas Shrug yeah in I think it's the
third time I read both of them and I
read them within the last couple of
months oh wow yeah yeah so I was you now
and then I I'm looking for a I don't
know a romantic read maybe that's
somewhat intellectually challenging and
now and then I'll pick up one of her
books and she's a curious figure to me
because IR Rand had every reason to
despise the Soviet Union and was a very
good counter voice to their machinations
but but well and you know I got
introduced to her books it was quite
interesting so I worked for the
Socialists when I was like 14 till I was
16 before I figured out that I didn't
know enough to presume that the way I
wanted to arrange the world in a utopian
fashion was credible and I figured that
out by the time I was about 17 I thought
well what do you know you don't have a
job I had little jobs you know you don't
have a business you don't have a family
you don't have any it's like what the
hell do you know really right so okay
anyways the person who gave me IR rand's
books was this woman Sandy notley she
was the mother of one of Alberta's
recent Premier a socialist Premier and
she was the wife of the only elected
socialist official in Alberta when I
grew up and I asked her what she gave me
Sol nits and and huley and Orwell like
she was an educated woman and and she
gave me Iran's books which I read when I
was like 13 and you know they're I found
them compelling you know they've got
that they're they're romantic Adventures
fundamentally with an intellectual bent
and I like the anti- collective ethos
that was embedded in them and then I've
read them like I said a couple of times
since then
so here's the problem I have and you can
help me sort this out like I certainly
agree with you that a society that isn't
predicated on something like recognition
of the intrinsic and superordinate worth
of the individual is doomed to
catastrophe right and so but then but
here's the rub as far as I'm concerned
and this is what I had really had a
problem with especially this time when I
went through rents books is
like her G John G for example and
Francisco Den conia her her and and the
who who's the architect uh Howard RoR
roor Ro R her heroic capitalists
essentially they're not precisely heroic
capitalists they're heroic
individualists who compete in the free
market okay and that's and that's fine
and you can see the libertarian side of
that and I'm also a free market Advocate
and partly because I think that
distributed decision making is a much
better computational model than
centralized planning obviously not
obvious right well yeah it should be but
it should be it's not obvious to utopian
luciferian intellects but it's obvious
even if you just think about it from a
computational perspective I just say the
smartest person is ignorant of 99.9 % of
knowledge yes EXA exactly well that's
exactly it is that precisely why you
want it distributed okay so that's
partly what I want to go into so now the
the Randy and heroes identify themselves
as fervent individualists and they and
you stop me as soon as I get any of this
wrong or in some way you don't disagree
with they're pursuing their own selfish
ethos right okay so that's the rub to me
because and I I would think I'm going to
think about this psychologically and
neurophysiologically so just to make it
complicated okay so the first question
would be well what exactly do you mean
by the individual and the self okay so
when a child develops let's say when a
child first emerges into the world
they're essentially a system of somewhat
disconnected primary instinctual
subpersonalities right and so they with
that with the nent possibility of a
uniting ego identity personality
something like continued a
continued uh a a continuity of memory
across time and but that has to emerge
now it seems to emerge as a consequence
of neurophysiological development and
experiential maturation and so you know
the child comes equipped into the world
say with the sucking reflex because it's
its mouth and tongue are very wired up
so that's where the child is most
conscious that's why kids when they can
put everything in their mouth because
they can feel it and investigate it far
far before they have control over their
eyes or their arms because their arms
sort of float around and so what happens
is they they they're born as a set of
somewhat independent systems and then
the independent systems partly under the
influence of of social demand integrate
themselves right okay now so and and
then like by the time a child is two
that child is still mostly disintegrated
emotional systems and so if you watch a
2-year-old and I use two for a specific
reason what you see is that they cycle
through basic motivational States so a
child is often like a
child whose demand oriented motivational
states are satiated will play right and
play and explore but then they get tired
and they'll cry or they'll get hungry
and they'll cry or they'll get angry and
they they'll have a tantrum or you know
or they'll burst into tears well I said
they'll cry and or they'll get anxious
right and so they're cycling through
these primary motivational States now we
understand that to some degree neurop
physi physiologically because the
older the brain system the more likely
it is to be operative in infancy right
so like the rage system or the system
that mediates anxiety or the system that
mediates pain those come into being
pretty early but it's hard for them to
get integrated okay now here's the
problem and I don't know how to
distinguish
individualism from Hedonism and I don't
know how to distinguish Hedonism from
possession by one of these lower order
motivational States so when when Rand
says we should be able to pursue our own
selfish needs she's kind of taking a
class she didn't say selfish needs she
saids self-interest
okay okay so fine okay okay so so that
no well no she I would say she moves
between those two because there are
never says Needs and POS okay she may
never say needs attacks that word all
the time okay okay right right fair
enough okay okay so I'll back off on the
Need side that was Ill Chosen and she
does she makes absolutely bloody
sure well wait a second she say your
needs are not a blank check on my I I
know I know but does but but she doesn't
does she say simultaneously that I have
no right to pursue my needs she doesn't
use that word she says you pursue your
self-interest to the best of your
abilities okay but she also uses the
word selfish yes okay okay so F in CTIC
way right okay right absolutely
absolutely I would just want to make
sure that we're proceeding on grounds
that we both regard as
appropriate so the liberal types the
Scottish liberals believe that if people
were encouraged to pursue their
self-interest that that would produce a
a reg a self-regulating system now ran
seems to accept that as a proposition
yes yes so if people are freely able to
pursue their self-interest then a system
of free exchange will emerge out of that
that has the appropriate qualities of
governance yes she says this explicitly
on donah Hugh she was asked saying that
if people pursu their own self-interest
there wouldn't be any oppression they
wouldn't be War they wouldn't be any
Hitler goes there should they be less
and she goes there wouldn't be any yeah
well look when I'm negotiating with
someone for a business deal let's say or
you know when I'm trying to formulate a
strategy that enables me to work happily
together with someone over the long run
I'm hoping that they'll be thrilled with
the deal like I'm not trying to win of
course I think well I would like to set
you up in a situation so that you could
pursue our mutual
goals completely of your own accord then
I don't even have to watch you right
because you're doing things for whatever
reasons you have but this this is the
thing this is this is what I don't quite
understand is that that self-interest
okay so it seems to me that for that
self-interest to
work then it has to be a self-interest
that's
commensurate with the structure that
would emerge if everyone was pursuing
their
self-interest
simultaneously you you see what I mean
it's not everyone well okay okay okay so
so let's
say you and I make an arrangement and
it's a long-term Arrangement and at one
point you decide that it's in your
selfin to violate that agreement because
you can Garner an intense short-term
gain as a consequence but there's a
long-term cost okay that's fine okay so
ruin this relationship and also there's
a long-term cost in terms of
myself what's the cost the cost is I'm
no longer a person of Integrity I'm not
a man of my word so Rand there's two
Rand quotes where she go first quot she
says that man is a being of self-made
soul and she also is in the Fountain
Head which is about hard work the
architect that a building has Integrity
just like a man and just a
seldom once your business gets to a
certain size cracks start to emerge and
things you used to do in a day are now
taking over a week if this is you then
you need to check out netsuite 37,000
businesses have upgraded to Nets Suite
by Oracle netsuite is the number one
Cloud Financial system streamlining
accounting financial management
inventory HR and more netu 25 this year
that's 25 years of helping businesses do
more with less they can help you close
your books in days not weeks and drive
down costs because your business is
one-of a kind you get a customized
solution for all of your key performance
indicators in one efficient system with
one source of Truth netw Suite will help
you manage risks get reliable forecasts
and improve margins I cannot stress
enough that you will have everything you
need to grow all in one place with netw
Suite
right now download netsuite's popular
kpi checklist designed to give you
consistently excellent performance for
absolutely free at netsuite.com
jbp that's netsuite.com jbp to get your
own key performance indicator checklist
again that's netsuite.com
jbp right so you're seeing her interest
is something that's nested inside a
larger scale conceptualization of
Integrity yes and and then okay and so
in fact the whole point of the Fountain
Head is she's contrasting these two
types of selfishness the first is Peter
keading who's this basic striver social
climber who has no internal self at all
no values other than what he sees around
him in fact the working title of the
Fountain Head was secondhand lives was
working in Hollywood and she asked the
woman who she was working with and
there's just kind of this like pin drop
moment where she's like I'm looking in
the face of the devil where the woman
goes I'll tell you what I want if
someone has a a a cloth coat I want a
fur coat if you have one car I want two
if your house is 500 square feet I want
a th foot house and Rand is like oh my
I've she's like this is evil someone who
has no self and whose values are
strictly a function of of those around
her hold on as opposed to Howard roor
who is selfish in the sense that he
pursues his own goals and values in
accordance with his moral code and and I
think those are the two definitions of
selfish I know
fine fine so let's tell C certainly
keing is portrayed in Rand as nothing
but a but he's the kind of social
climber who will do anything to gain
comparative status in his profession but
he will never be able to tell you why he
wants the status what is he going to do
with it it's it's kind of just in and of
itself good but he has no values well
okay so that's that's the thing that's
that's that's interesting to me because
I don't think I don't think that it's
appropriate to presume that the mere
search for social status is not
self-interest now I'm not I know you're
making a more sophisticated argument
than that but I want to elaborate it
completely so I could say I'm going to
play Devil's Advocate against Rand and
and for now we do that okay so I would
say well on what grounds are you
criticizing Peter King's decision
self-interested decision to
prioritize status Above All Else that's
what he thinks is appropriate apparently
and so on what grounds is that an
inappropriate conclusion well I would
even say that he thinks it I think it's
more that he's kind of taken this uh
subconscious subconsciously from the
ethos he does not someone who thinks
these things through he just goes with
what everyone else tells him fine I got
you I've got no objections to that I
think that's how he's portrayed but what
on what grounds do you believe that
that's inappropriate because just
because his self-interest doesn't match
that of and you know Peter keing is an
archetyp character in the r Universe
right I mean he's duplicated in many
other characters like Ellsworth Tui for
example it's like a meta King
essentially Al he's the spider behind
the scenes who's orchestrating
everything but he claims to be selfless
but he's certainly pursuing comparative
status like King is but but but and
there's a very
powerful overt and covert implication in
Ram that the path that King and Tui
takes is inappropriate and the path that
roor takes or friend Isco Dean I'm
probably mixing up the characters in the
book at the moment is the path of like
true individual heroism that's the
romantic adventure part but the exactly
the reason they're they're both
self-interested they're not
self-interested because Peter keing
doesn't have a self there's no one there
that's okay that right that was my
mystery so so what does it mean for
there to be something there right
because so he's reduced he's reduced
himself to one dimension which is social
comparison
but that's not nothing that's one
dimmension but it's it's nothing to him
it doesn't matter to him it only matters
to other people so therefore it matters
to him this is not coming from the
Call's not coming from inside of the
house and this is where I would bring in
Albert Kimu because I I sometimes I keep
talks about networking and one of the
advice I give people I say if you know
someone's in town for their birthday
right I go I always take out that person
for their birthday and I do for selfish
reasons right and everyone laughs and I
go the reason I do it is because don't
you want to be the guy who takes people
out for their birthday awesome you could
what's it going to cost you 25 bucks in
an hour so the whole point of the Kimo's
kind of absurdism is that life is
inherently meaningless but this is a
wonderful opportunity because you can be
the kind of person that you want and
it's not necessarily that hard it's just
being consistent so if you want to be
someone who's High status who no one
genuinely who no one who genuinely knows
you likes or admires knock yourself out
at a certain point the brain can only
dute itself it's counterproductive it's
counter or do you want to be the kind of
person who when faced with tough
decisions as I have in my life and as
you have in your life we're like you
know what 20 years from now I'm going to
look back at this fork in the road and
I'm going to chastise myself if I buckle
and do the weak thing even though it's
going to cost me something in the medium
term these are two different paths that
brand portrays okay okay and I think
that's a very good moral code to live by
okay so let me extract out some
principles from that and you tell me
what you think so one of the things that
I proposed was that you know a very
young person 2 years old is still a
relatively unintegrated yes conflict of
internal Dimensions motivational
dimensions that's a good way of thinking
about it okay now we also hypothesize
that the problem with keing and Tue for
example is that they sacrifice to Social
Status so they become onedimensional and
you portrayed it as a false Dimension
and you said there's no self there okay
so here's a hypothesis about why it's a
false why it's false okay and you tell
me what you think about this okay so
imagine that there that there's a set of
constraints that
are
implicit in the natural and the social
World such that if all these underlying
motivational systems want to optimize
their inter
relationships and they want to optimize
their inter relationships in a social
world and they want to optimize their
inter relationships across time so
iterates that a pattern will that a
necessary pattern will emerge now I
think that's the pattern that your
conscience calls you on when you deviate
from by the way and I also think it's
the pattern that makes things
interesting to you in the world so
imagine that out of this
internal conflict of Spirits that's a
good way of thinking about it there's a
way of a mode of
integration and that's that will satisfy
all these internal systems in the
optimal possible Manner and then there's
an
instinct that feeds that
development that calls to you by making
things interesting to you that would
force you to develop in an integrated
direction or that emerges as conscience
if you fail to do it and that that's not
a unidimensional system of value it's a
multi-dimensional system of value and
it's a multi-dimensional iterable system
of value that also works so that if you
play that game and I play that game and
we occupy the same territory both of our
games will improve right so it's not a
zero sum it's not a zero sum
optimization okay so then this is where
I have part maybe problems with the
concept of Anarchy per se so let me tell
you why so does any of that seem
inappropriate to you that seems r
that that seems fine okay so okay so let
me tell you why I have a harder time
placing Anarchy in
that in in that position okay
so I did this seminar on Exodus with a
group of people and one of the things we
did was elaborate up a conceptualization
that's derived from The Exodus story
that's the basic basis of Catholic
Social teaching or much of it as it
turns out called subsidiarity and
subsidiary out of a particular story in
The Exodus narrative and so what you
have in the narrative is the Israelites
who have the habits of slaves and so
they're
basically you could think about them as
a mass of Peter Kings they're they're
like they're they're only after
short-term gratification right and so
they have the habits of slaves they
they've never planned they've never
integrated you could say maybe the true
self is absent that might be another way
of thinking about it and so they try to
make Moses into another Pharaoh yeah
right in the desert right he sits as
their judge and he has to work out all
their problems okay so that's the
scenario this is happening while they're
in the desert now moses' father-in-law
whose name is Jethro comes along and he
says you have to stop doing this he says
this to Moses he says there's two
reasons number one if you take all that
responsibility and power onto yourself
it'll kill you plus you'll just set
yourself up as another Pharaoh by taking
all this respons possibility that the
Israelites are abdicating and then
you'll be back in the same situation you
were in to begin with and two if you
take away that decision-making power
from the Israelites then they'll just
stay useless slaves forever right okay
so you can't do that right and for two
reasons you don't get to be a tyrant and
they don't get to be slaves okay okay so
then he but then he proposes something
very specific as in consequence he says
take all your tens of thousands of
people and make them into a hierarchical
society and so get them to group
themselves in groups of 10 voluntarily
right so pick your 10 people and then
from amongst yourself in the 10 nominate
the best of the 10 okay so now you've
got your 10 people and leader now all
the people are divided into tens now
take the leaders put them in groups of
10 have them do the same thing do that
all the way up to you cuz you're the
voice of God at the moment and then if
the Israelites have
a have a
dispute they settle it if they can't
settle it by themselves they settle it
with their guy who's one in 10 and if he
can't figure out how to do it he goes to
one in 100 and then one in a th now so
you have a social hierarchy in place
right but it's a voluntary social
hierarchy right and every single level
of the hierarchy has a requisite
responsibility and that makes a that
makes a pyramidal structure that's the
alternative to the Tyrant and the slave
okay so now there's maybe there's two
ways you could conceptualize the
individual and this is where I have the
problem with the anarch anarchical
Viewpoint I think that the identity that
Rand is promoting is actually a
reflection of the harmonious operation
of that whole hierarchy right the whole
thing it's not it can't be simply
located at the level of the individual
because if you're going to comport
yourself in a harmonious manner like we
are in this conversation like at the
moment I know you're not subjugating
your individuality to the demands of the
conversation because then it wouldn't be
a conversation right but you are
bringing your I am subjugating some
extent this is your show I can't just
talk about whatever I want right right
right well well but but you're doing it
voluntarily and you know the rules of
the game and you're doing it because you
have your own reasons so so I wouldn't
say I don't think it's it's so not so
much subjugation as it is your choice to
play the same game I'm playing okay so
this is a hierarchy of games right right
well I set the frame for this particular
interaction right and I would return the
favor if I was if if you were hosting
this right right but but you're doing it
voluntarily correct but but then see the
thing about Rand and this is the same
thing by the way that's done by
virtually every psychologist just so you
know it is that Rand doesn't spend much
time detailing out the necessary
structure of the subsidiary hierarchy
that would have to be produced to
transform an emphasis on individual
orientation into a complex and
sophisticated Society right and I don't
think it's enough to say if people were
just pursuing their own enlightened
self-interest that society would
automatically harmonize because you
could also imagine that okay so that
that that sit with you it's not
automatic at all it's every group if is
Starbucks an automatic hierarchy no it's
thousands of employees working together
and they create this International
Organization where if I go to the
Starbucks in Washington it's going to be
the same as roughly as I go to Starbucks
in Paris right so these hierarchies do
emerge voluntarily but it's not
automatic at all it's just if you're
looking at it from the uh the eagleee
perspective it's just these little dots
but when you get more granular
perspective it's infinite people
choosing to work together to create this
kind of superstructure yes right okay
okay well so so automatic is it's not
automatic at all fine fine well that
that's I'm perfectly happy to accept
that because I don't I also don't think
it's automatic I think that those
structures have to be set up and and
maintained yes and in keeping with an
ethos I think okay okay okay so one of
the point is this is why culture is so
important and having this kind of
promation of ideas and morals and values
because if you just have people who are
all very uh um uh High Time preference
and just are not thinking past the next
moment you're not going to be able to
build a society out them unless you get
rid of that first cuz if you're only
thinking to the next 5 minutes in this
kind of like uh maybe someone who's been
in prison all his life and don't have
been trained not to think long term it's
going to be almost impossible to have
any kind of working relationship because
he'd rather have that candy bar today
than two candy bars tomorrow because he
knows he's not going to see tomorrow
okay okay so so you you you brought in
the the concept of time preference which
you think is absolutely appropriate well
yeah because crucial okay why why did
you to the conclusion that that first of
all why don't you define time preference
so everybody knows exactly what you're
talking about and then I want to know
why you came to the conclusion that
there's a reason that you brought the
time preference discussion into this
discussion so maybe you could elaborate
what that is I always get them backwards
there's High Time preference and low
time preference point being like we see
this with kids in inner cities who they
aren't sure they're going to ever see
old age the people they deal with are
not trustworthy so if they're offered
look I'll give you either a candy bar
today or tomorrow if you wait one day
you'll have two candy bars they will
overwhelmingly take the one today bur
hand because the odds that the person is
going to be there tomorrow or is
trustworthy are quite low and this
extrapolates in a very nefarious way
because if you're living moment to
moment you're not going to school to
plan for medical school how long do you
have to go to medical school if you're a
doctor it's years and years you're just
thinking just getting past tomorrow is a
function also of poverty when someone's
worried about their next meal it's very
hard to maintain that vision of what I'm
going to be doing when I'm 40 right so
that is that concept
of the crucial right okay so the the and
this is also why having a stable Society
is important and why governments are
often a problem take inflation if I
don't know how much a dollar is going to
be worth 10 years from now how am I
going to make a contract with you that
yeah well right well you're also
punished then for foregoing
gratification right that's one the
terrible things about inflation is that
you actually punish the people who are
the conscientious people upon who labor
society would be imagine you tell me
that okay in a year from now you're
going to deliver 10 yards of silk but
the definition of a yard today is 36 in
but tomorrow it might be 3 in it's just
like I I or or or 50 in I can't make any
kind of plan if the definition of a yard
changes so if the definition of what a
dollar changes year to year and it loses
its value you can't make long-term
planning because if you say I'm going to
give you a million dollars 10 years from
now I don't know what that means it
could be mean it could be worthless
right right right right right okay so
now back to this neurophysiological
spectrum okay so of one more Point Rand
is very much and this is where I very
much par with her very much a child of
the Enlightenment she has this
Enlightenment delusion in my opinion
that if a bunch of people sit down and
they're given all the data and they hash
it out they're all going to come to the
same conclusion and I don't think that
hold imp yeah I don't think that holds
up at all no no but but the but you're
outlining a you're outlining the the the
the structure of the proper constraint
through which that mass of data would be
interpreted so your correct okay so well
so so because the once you bring time
preference into it you you're starting
to work in the domain that implicitly
assumes that there is a higher order
integration so these these initial
systems these initial motivational
systems they're very shortterm so and
they want short-term gratification so
when a baby whales when it cries it
wants to be satisfied now but can I say
one thing this is the distinction Rand
draws between Hedonism and her
philosophy because she thinks that the
more moral a person the more longrange
his thought whereas Hedonism is very
much pleasure of the moment and I'm
going defend Hedonism a little bit
because the term gets a bad rap Hedonism
isn't Co orgies Hedonism is Martha
Stewart where you're having coffee and
and book club with your friends and
having the pleasure of that's more this
okay but would put you you can actually
separate those Tech because that kind of
Hedonism would be more on the aesthetic
end right and it's more sophisticated
I'm talking about pleasure per se isn't
bad right with this epicurian idea of
Hedonism how was pitched you know
thousands of years ago it wasn't at all
this maximizing pleasure the moment
right right right okay yeah well so so
okay so
we'll Define the kind of Hedonism that
we're objecting to as blinkered by the
short term but I also hate this kind of
wasp susp I of heis and this pure T like
if you're having pleasure you're doing
something wrong and it's like pleasure
is wonderful people should do it more in
the sense of I'm reading a nice book I'm
enjoying a fire I'm having a walk with
my friends these are all well everything
in its place is the prop notion for that
right right and so so the demand for
hedonic gratification shouldn't be put
forward in a manner that sacrifices the
overall Integrity it's the reward yeah
yeah I worked hard and now I get to
watch a stupid TV show and not feel any
guilt about it because I did my work for
today right right well and it's necess
no shame about it yeah yeah well the
psych psychologists know if they're wise
that you you want to have all the forms
of motivation that are available to you
working to push you forward and and
certainly the draw so technically the
source of reward that people work
hardest for isn't satiation reward you
know they would if they were starving
you know like you can you can put
animals and human beings into a
situation while they'll work like
single-mindedly for satiation right like
if you haven't had anything to drink for
2 weeks right you're going to be pretty
motivated that
aside this is something the Soviets
understood very well that is something
yes definitely yes well tyrants
understand that very well yes yes
because they they they they leverage the
force of these basic motivational
systems right mostly the sort of
pleasure that people pursue is the
pleasure of noting that they're moving
forward towards a desired goal okay
there's a whole neurophysiological
system set up that mediates that and
it's the system activated by drugs like
cocaine that's the dopaminergic system
and it it has its origins in the same
system that mediates voluntary
exploratory activity right so it's a
very ancient system it it emerges it's
hypothalamic the hypothalamus is a part
of the brain that sits right on top of
the spinal cord it's an absolutely
ancient system and the pleasure that we
generally are most motivated by does
activate these systems and if you want
people to be actively engaged in a
meaningful way in their own life and in
their social Pursuits then you want to
make sure that that system is operating
in the direction of those Pursuits right
so then one of the things that happens
when people make an agreement is that
they set up a shared aim right so we our
aim today was to have an interesting
conversation that we could share with
people okay so that sets up our nervous
system so as long as we're uttering
words in a manner that moves us towards
that aim then we're going to stay
engaged and enthusiastic because that
well because that the system that
produces enthusiasm and engagement is
now on board in relationship to that aim
okay so imagine this then so that your
aim becomes the participation in the
social system that's optimally balanced
when people are pursuing their
enlightened self-interest in a manner
that's of maximal social utility that
stretches across the longest possible
time span I I I I don't have any use for
social utility I don't think that term
has any meaning okay this is okay so so
so that what does that mean let let me
explain that and you tell me what you
think about it okay so let's go back to
this idea of subsidiarity right this
hierarchy yes okay so you can think
about that in your own life so maybe you
have a an intimate relationship with
someone might be a child or a parent or
or sibling or or your spouse okay now so
that would be the primary domain of
social interaction all right so now how
would you characterize
your how do you characterize that
relationship like you want it to sustain
over a long period of time you have an
obligation to it you have a
responsibility to it like and is that
the beginning of the polity that like
just that dietic relationship if you
want to be a good person I think yeah
then you do have a kind of again this
speaks to what kind of person do you
want to be do you want to be someone
that your family can admire and rely on
and knowing that when this hits the
fan they'll be in a position to
reciprocate do you want to be that
provider or that source of strength
again this is your opportunity to be
that person or do you want to be the guy
who's not there for his kids you have
that opportunity too and at the end of
the day you're going to have to look
yourself in the mirror or avoid make or
avoiding eye contact in the mirror and
face or waking up at 3:00 in the morning
being tormented by your conscience if
you still have one or or deadening it
with alcohol or whatever the situation
might be so
yeah so so then that that was what I was
trying to portray as a social good but
it's I I mean the the social good is the
consequence not the
goal how about how about the good is the
harmony between the social manifestation
and the individual manifestation so look
part of the reason I've been thinking
this through is because I think that the
modern definition of mental health
subjective is sorely wrong because I
think that mental health is actually the
Harmony in that hierarchy of being and
not something that you have in your head
I mean ran called her philosophy
objectivism so I completely agree with
you I I don't I think anytime you're
introducing subjectivism to a large
extent you're treading on thin ice okay
so so then let's go to the object
objective in relationship to what like
where's the objective reality that that
Ran's pattern of behavior is aiming to
to what would you say to adapt to
everywhere we live in it there's nowhere
else to go okay so it that seems to me
to be the same notion as this subsidiary
structure so so we can walk through it
so you've got your wife let's say okay
and you make a bond with her that's long
run and your narrow individuality is
integrated into the broader diad of that
we're all then diagrams okay okay then
you do that with there's you and your
co-workers there's you and your
employees there's you and your friends
there's you and your daughter you and
your city you and your town right okay
peers right so we agree on that so
that's the polity that I'm thinking
about so how do you it's fluid it's not
it's not it's it changes all the you
could job podcast get divorced right but
there's principle it's not entirely
fluid because no it's not entirely fluid
right right it's hopefully it's
optimally fluid sure right right right
okay so that's fine and that optimal I
would say say part of the marker of its
optimality is fluidity yes right right
that's why the Dow is water right it's
not Stone it has this capacity to adapt
and and sometimes you have to cut your
losses and that's fine the the sun cost
just because you've been in a
relationship for 10 years does not mean
well I should continue it for in
perpetuity right at least any
relationship I don't mean marriage it
could be just your the contractor you
work with or a lawyer right well so your
your point seems to me to be that your
alliance in any of those subsidiary
organizations shouldn't be a prison
correct but it's something that's that
should be that's something that thrives
and needs maintenance and and is re
reborn every single day like every
single day you anyone has the option to
get divorced or to not talk to their
kids or to fire whoever or to so so if
you accept the necessity of these
embedded relationships multiple embedded
relationship okay so why do you
conceptualize that why exactly I'm not
trying to catch you out here I'm curious
well why do you conceptualize that as
Anarchy
voluntary yeah okay fine so that's the
fundamental princi yes yeah fine fine
fine that's it that is okay so so here's
a rule of thumb so this is actually a
rule of thumb that we implemented in
this Arc Enterprise that I've been
trying to promote let's say is that all
policy that's not based on voluntarism
is to be regarded at minimum as
suboptimal if it's Force if there's any
use of force IED well so so let me take
that Emma gold let me well I think the
principle of volunteerism is
extraordinarily important right because
it's actually a sign of the optimization
of the relationship correct yeah yeah
okay okay but all right fair enough yeah
but wait now wait is I think we should
cut it here I got what I wanted
isolation can only go in a bad Direction
I there's a complication here's the
complication all right so so well it's
unfortunate there's a complication but
there there is a complication so imagine
that if we engage in in interactions
voluntarily right that we can cooperate
sure okay now imagine we set up a whole
domain of Cooperators who who's
we you you you and I have another friend
sure right and and we have a
conversation with nine people right and
we're having a good conversation okay
fine now we're all playing by the rules
that enable that conversation to
continue and the rules include the fact
that anybody can step out of the
conversation whenever they don't want to
participate okay right so it keeps so it
keeps the playful and and um aimed in a
positive direction and self- sustaining
okay now we get one person in there okay
who plays status game that's okay right
okay now so and let's say for the sake
of argument let's call him Lex that that
that that game what a jerk that that
that that um brings the conversation in
some ways to a halt okay so these these
Dynamic voluntary model associations
have been moded so you can imagine
imagine you could set up a stable
Society of Cooperators but the problem
is if you drop one person in there who's
a shark like a short-term hedonistic
psychopath they can take everything they
can take everything okay so you said you
said you can't use Force what do you do
with people who don't play fair if
you're at a party let's go this party
scenario and there's someone there who's
just being an ass yeah whoever's home it
is it's their domicile at a certain
point you tell them get the F out okay
but but then then you have the problem
of the necessity of force in that Force
it's your home if if they're a
trespasser at that point you have no I'm
not saying it's unj okay let's no one
has the right let's define okay Define
okay we we already agreed that an
optimized relationship is dependent on
voluntary asset correct and we also
agreed that and that they're fluid right
and they're fluid so my right to be here
on this show is fluid and any moment you
could be like malice you know what you
are really crossing a line we're cutting
it here get the hell out and that's not
Force it's still your this is your house
your show okay then we need to Define
force no that and that's what private
property does private property
delineates who has the uh position to
determine what happens within that area
okay your house and you say if you want
to be in my house you have to wear an
orange shirt I'm not giving an
explanation I have a choice a I can show
up an orange shirt or I can push your
buttons and be like I'm going to show up
in purose see well so you're you're
defining private property as I believe
as a domain where you are um Sovereign
yeah well and so what so when what that
means is that you have the right and
maybe even the responsibility to use
requisite force in that situation to
maintain the necessary peace that's a
precondition for voluntary Association I
wouldn't even call it Force because if
I'm trespassing I'm the one who's
initiating Force if I go to someone's
home where I'm not welcome I'm the one
who's using Force I need a definition of
force because look if you throw
prisoners in prison sure because they
continually violate other people's
property they're the ones who initiated
Force by by going after somebody else
assuming that these people were actual
criminals you know that making that
assumtion some actual rapist and now
they were locked into a cage they're the
ones who initiated Force as as a who
started this chain and what is done to
them as a consequence which is let's
assume it's done to rational and above
aboveboard manner is a consequence of
their actions so okay okay so so you're
implying I believe that the use of
force this is why we need a word because
like if I have to throw you out of here
most people would say by the normative
meaning of the word force that I use
Force to throw you out now you're CL not
in moral sense right right not in the
moral sense right right so then the the
issue becomes I've been welcomed in your
in in your home right at a certain point
if I outstay my even if I'm you're like
hey malice come crash on my sofa you
know what I mean I know you're here at a
certain point if I'm blasting music or
outstaying my welcome and you're like
okay your right to stay here has been
revoked and if I start squatting I'm the
one who is infringing on your PR right
so for you to either yourself or call
Private Security or the police to be
like get this guy out of here that's not
initiating so that's minimum necessary
self-defense something like that yeah
well that's a good principle I mean I
think I think one of the other
principles of appropriate social
organization is minimum necessary Force
so your claim see but the problem with
government the thing is is that people
won't see we already agreed that the
proper social organization is one based
on voluntary ascent and if you're
crashing on my couch you might not want
to leave voluntarily so I'm
transgressing against again you're the
Sovereign is your home that's what
private property adjudicates who's whose
opinion matters yeah and if it's your
house it's yours period
yeah right right right right well period
within some some appropriate limits and
I think we have actually worked those
out quite well you know generally
speaking especially in the United States
with our definition of what constitutes
private property so see I'm I'm still
I'm still I'm still having trouble with
the domain of how you organize policy if
your emphasis is on what's voluntary
people break the rules eBay does this
all the time if
I buy a fossil as I have recently from
Czech Republic and that fossil turns out
to be fake I can adjudicate it through
eBay I could adjudicate it through
PayPal where I paid or I could adjud
through adjudicate through my credit
card company none of these are
governments but they're all in a
position to reverse that transaction
this is an example of anarchism in
practice because the idea that I'm going
to sue someone in Czech Republic for a
fossil is is no possibility of that
happening okay so this definition that
you use that equates anarchism with
voluntary
volunteerism do you think that that's I
wouldn't say necessarily that that's how
anarchism is viewed in the popular
culture and by that's by Design just the
say way the Soviet Union is viewed as
somehow infinitely preferable to Nazi
Germany in the popular culture
right so okay so you're because those
who are in power I wondered why you were
relatively easy to get along with for an
anarchist and it's fundamentally because
you predicate your notion of anarchism
on voluntary aset but they all did
I mean Emma Goldman and Berkman did as
well they they wanted a society based on
peace and they viewed the capitalists as
exploiters so even at the end of the day
they this is one of the reasons Berkman
and Goldman were both yelling at lennin
they're like we're for their version
they call anarchism and socialism regard
to synonymous in that school at the time
therefore we're for the individual
complete Free Speech Emma Goldman fought
to have uh um f fight the draft in World
War I she was correct and for to teach
women how to prevent pregnancy at the
time it was a felony to distribute
condoms or to explain uh birth control
from a doctor to someone who wanted to
prevent a pregnancy um so and books were
banned you know you can't use the Mals
for ulyses James Joyce was banned for
example so that was their version of
anarchism and they're spot on in that
regard that the government s has the
position to tell you what you can or
can't say to whom right so so your your
claim Pro probably is something like it
seems to me that you're claim is
something like you have the right and
perhaps the responsibility to respond in
a manner that restores the peace that's
a good way of thinking about it if
someone violates the principles by which
any interaction could continue on the
basis of voluntary asset I I don't know
I I don't know if I can follow that
train of thought but well I'm trying to
figure out the exactly the justification
for me being able to throw you off your
couch my couch it's like your your point
is that the fact that you've overstayed
your welcome means that you've already
introduced an element of compulsion and
force okay exact correct well and the
reason that that would be wrong is
because it violates that principle of
voluntary asset I no longer want you on
my damn couch right right so you've
already language right right exactly
you've already you've already you've
already initiated a process that
violates that that Integrity the
Integrity of the relationship right and
so then I'm not only Justified but
required I would say
well that's a tough one right because
yeah well you can imagine let's say in
in the situation that you already
described is you did someone a favor and
they're in on your couch and they
they've been there for 3 months and they
didn't get a job and they're eating like
Cheetos and it's like it's just not a
good situation what what the alternative
is like it's it's it's Toronto and I'm
going to be on the street and I'm going
to die right so like that might be a
situation you're like okay maybe put let
me put you in a hotel I can yeah yeah
yeah no no fair enough but but the
requirement would come because maybe the
reason you're not calling me on my
behavior is because you're afraid or
because you don't want to you don't want
to appear mean or you don't want to hurt
my feelings so that when you're but when
you're in your room at night you're like
pissed off at yourself and your
conscience is gnawing at you because you
actually have something to do right and
it's time to call this person out
because you are VI you are violating
your integrity okay so that's what I
meant by the responsibility okay yeah
yeah I didn't mean a deterministic
responsibility I meant because we're
we're elaborating the idea that there is
a principle of long-term Integrity here
that's actually real or maybe the most
real thing what kind of person do you
want to be at the end of the day is what
it comes down to and this is again why
I'm such a Kimu fan and the idea that
existence precedes essence in I don't
know if I'd say that literally but the
idea that we have we the I always use
this metaphor and I think it's very
informative where there's two types of
people you go to top of mountain top and
you see the blank canvas and a bunch of
paints and a certain mentality like what
is this this is just stupid and the
other type is like this is a one F
opportunity I can paint this mountain
side I can paint something abstract I
can paint myself I can paint you know
just this blade of grass and that is
what life is like that that Kimo's
version of life being inherently
meaningless is a great opportunity for
any of us to be the kind of person to a
certain extent that we want to be and
this is very very exciting because we're
not really taught I mean you're taught
in school that you could do anything you
want and that's kind of a lie but in
terms of you can be the kind of person
you want to be morally that everyone
does have that capacity to be and we're
all going to make mistakes and that's
what institution is for okay so let me
ask you why you conceptualize that as
meaningless and why it is that because
the it sounds to me like the the meaning
of what you mean by meaningless is
something like the freedom to choose the
direction yes correct okay but but but
but you've already made it clear that
you don't regard that okay so back to
the Exodus story I I'll tell you
something that H also that happens in
Exodus very interesting so when God
enables Moses to stand up to the Pharaoh
he informs him that there are certain
words he should use he says let my
people go right it was very famous
phrase but that's not what he says he
says let my people go so they may
worship me in the wilderness and that's
that's very much relevant to this issue
of subsidiarity because what it posits
is that there's a form of escape from
tyranny that isn't well I would say
anarchic Hedonism let's try that out
right which is what happens when the
golden calf gets worshiped right is that
everybody reverts to immediate
gratification and everything descends
into hell it's an ordered freedom and
that's a vision of ordered Freedom
that's the proper Worship in the desert
and that's the alternative to tyranny
and slavery and that ordered Freedom
seems to me to be something like the
service of the principle that allows for
voluntary Ascent across broadest
possible range of circumstances right
and that would be a very good there's is
there a difference then in your argument
for anarchism and the libertarian
argument for radically restricted
government like did they dovetail yeah
six months okay so what do you mean
meaning this minarchist delusion is
completely incoherent uh there's no such
thing as a minimal government and and
we've run this experiment the
Constitution was designed to create the
smallest government possible and it
ended up creating the largest government
that's ever existed so if you're go so
talking Aristotle so you think it's
inevitable that the government just I
don't think so that's what the data
tells us yeah so you know one of the
things that happens in the Old Testament
and by the way before the ink on the
Constitution was dry people were going
to jail for violating the first for spe
free speech so it didn't even last five
years before the Sedition laws were
being passed sorry maybe 10 in the Old
Testament the Israelites once they
escape from the Pharaoh call out to God
continually for a king yes and God says
no you don't want a king and the
Israelites say yeah we really want a
king and God says no you actually don't
want a king what you want to do is take
responsibility for your own lives and
the Israelites go no we want a king
right and so so so that's your point
clean your room yeah well the thing what
what I've realized more and more clearly
too is that part of the reason that you
and this is an ethical requirement I
would say and this is part of why I was
struggling with Ran's conceptualization
but is that every bit of responsibility
that you don't pick up for
yourself will pay use against that's
like yeah right right right so that's
also that's really the core problem with
the utopian delusion is because you
could just imagine you know you can hear
you can see I've seen whiny ticktockers
about the fact that they have to
go to work and their complaint is well
why doesn't the government were Rich
enough so I could be provided with a
universal basic income and I think well
if you don't have the imagination to see
that if the government made you so
dependent or encouraged you enticed you
to become so dependent that now you're
dependent on that Universal basic income
if you can't see that as the door
opening to a tyranny so absolutely
pervasive you could hardly imagine it
then you're just not thinking because of
course that would happen right but a lot
of people don't want to be free they
want to be in that cage we see it
nowadays where people are desperate to
have Co restrictions back and they're
wearing
masks yeah well that's a false security
right yeah yeah it's also a cue that
you're part of the in group it's a
that you're one of the good I'm well
that's a that's a form of security too a
form of unearned moral of un un moral
virtue yeah all right so so let's maybe
we'll close with this we probably should
so let's let's try this
so this is a complicated question all
right lightning round you're
contrasting that that form of in that
specific comment you are contrasting a
kind of
security and Status seeking with the
proper Moral Moral orientation so let me
try something on on you for size I don't
it's necessarily status necessarily I
think a lot of people just want security
they don't care about status they they
okay that's fine that's fine but you can
imagine some people would concern
themselves with security and other
people might corre that's fine that's
fine and both of those could be illusory
and unearned correct okay so obviously
there's an
orientation that isn't that right that's
an alter alternative to that that you
would find admirable yes okay so here's
one of the things that I've been
deriving I'm writing this book on the on
the biblical Corpus called we who
wrestle with God and I've been trying to
understand the nature of the ethos
that's being presented okay so one of
the things I would say there's two
elements to the ethos one is that you
sacrifice the short term for the long
term right so that's a Time preference
issue and in fact that's the definition
of sacrifice so part of what the Old
Testament is about is an inquiry into
the form of sacrifice that's most
pleasing to God and it's clearly
something like a longterm sacrifice
right is you put up with the privations
of the moment to ensure riches in heaven
yeah exact exactly so so it's actually
it's actually a time frame that's
extended out into into eternity right
which is a very interesting thing right
I mean I mean I'm I'm not even sure what
to make of that is that like is the
proper time frame infinite like is that
how you should be regarding the echoing
of each of your actions because the
answer to that could hypothetically be
yes well this is a big distinction
between Judaism and Christianity or at
least as I was taught in Yeshiva where
we were taught that this whole when I
went to church for the first time with a
bunch of friends in the midwest they
never met a Jewish person before so they
started interrogating me I didn't have a
lot of the answers and one of the points
is Judaism is not at all thinking about
the after life because the way we're
taught is this life is a beautiful gift
the Creator and if you're looking if
he's giv you this amazing meal and
you're like what's for dessert it's
almost spitting in his face so
appreciate this gift you've given and do
the most you can with it in accordance
with his wi as and he let him worry
about the dessert he knows what he's
doing right William Blake would have a
good a good objection to that idea I
would say because he his Transcendent
Vision was to see eternity in a grain of
sand right so that instead of replacing
the present with the forestalled and
suffering the error that you just
described is you integrate the Eternal
into the moment yes right right which
and then well that's you see that you
see Echoes of that in the gospel
insistence that Christ has that the
Kingdom of Heaven is spread upon the
Earth but men will not see it right so
it isn't something like it's ambiguous
because it's also what happens in the
infinite future but it isn't only that
it's what happens in the infinite future
that's infused into the current course
there's very different kinds of
Christianity and how they approach right
right right well and it's a complicated
problem because you know one of the
things we've talked about today is the
notion of time frame and the fact that
as you mature and I this is actually the
definition of maturation is that your
time frame expands right so that you're
trying to calculate the proper path
along along across the broadest possible
variety of iterations but I just also
feel very very strongly that this is
this this life as we have it no matter
what your religious view is not dress
rehearsal right and don't take it
lightly and no matter what your faith is
God put you on this Earth for a reason
and don't just be like H whatever I'm
I'll worry about it you know after with
in the afterlife yeah yeah well the you
can see that the what the exaggeration
of that Viewpoint leads to the Marxist
criticism that religion is just the
opiate of the masses is you can suffer
all you need to now because reward in
the afterlife will be infinite yeah well
I right no no I it seems to me that has
something much more to do at a more
profound level with this notion of
infusing the moment with eternality is
that and N you kind of caught on to that
to some degree right because when he was
trying to work out what you would be
motivated by if you actually what would
you say Express what he described as the
will to power properly that you would
try to live every moment so that if you
were destined to have to relive that
moment for eternity you would say yes to
it right so yeah yeah so so that is that
is a concent you see and you see this in
the Sermon on the Mount too though
because what Christ basically says in
The Sermon on the Mount is that you
should Orient yourself towards the
highest possible good yes both
transcendentally and communally but then
you should concentrate intently on the
moment right right and then that brings
eternity into the present moment yes do
what you can with what you have and you
have that opportunity every single day
right and that's what presents well and
I actually actually think that that is
the reality that presents itself that
what we see your metaphor of being on a
mountain with the with the with the
easel in front of you is a metaphor that
if so you climb the mountain now you can
see everywhere right so that's a
transcendental PL place and so your
metaphoric claim in that imagery was
that if you climb to the place where you
can see everything that what presents
itself in front of you is something like
a blank canvas now you Associated that
with meaninglessness but that's a
strange Association because I would
associate that with the deepest of all
possible meanings is that you have the
ability to participate in creation
itself essentially so why do you why
does it cuz cvus is blank and there's no
wrong answer per se well there might be
a an answer that violates the principle
of voluntary Ascent sure and there might
be that you're going to draw a painting
that looks like complete garbage right
but the point is this is an opportunity
and this is an opportunity that's
Uniquely Yours and and this is not
something to take lightly okay so but
still why meaningless like this is
tamu's word right he says life is
inherently meaningless meaning this idea
that you have to live for the sake of
society right okay oh I see so so you
see it you see that as a rebellion
against an arbitrary moral Cod
essentially that's one of his books is
called The Rebel so yes yes yeah okay
okay okay so that's right all right so I
would see that as a variant of of what
the the insistence that you should
follow the spirit Spirit instead of the
Dogma you don't substitute Dogma for
Spirit correct okay look that's a good
place to end actually and unfortunately
you never said the second thing you said
there were two things oh yes okay oh I'm
sorry
yes yes AB oh sorry absolutely okay well
so so the sacrifice there has see see
the question that emerges in the Old
Testament Corpus is what's the nature of
the optimized sacrifice right and it it
is it's something like it's something
like we've discussed already it's the
sacrifice it's the ultimate sacrifice of
the narrow self to the transcendental
self and this is where I was having
trouble with ram because I wasn't sure
how she organized the transcendental
cell we've already defined it like the
transcendental self is the self one of
the ways of thinking about is the self
that enables you to establish a
voluntary relationship even with
yourself across long spans of time while
simultaneously doing that with other
people who are also voluntarily doing it
right there's a pattern there and this
is why the meaningless thing got me a
bit because if there's a pattern of
voluntary Ascent that's optimal which is
what you're striving for in this
anarchism then and then that's not
meaningless it's just structured in a
very complex and sophisticated way that
can't be reduced to a simple Dogma
correct and also in terms of being
transcendental we're still talking about
her 40 years after she died so her
Mission has been accomplished right her
works and engagement right well that's
that's the thing about you know if your
work is infused with something
approximating Eternal truth right which
means that it would highlight certain
archetypal realities those be objective
realities in her phraseology um then
it's going to last because part of the
tradition that lasts and the tradition
that lasts is a reflection of games that
can be played iteratively voluntarily
okay okay okay so that's even a better
place to end okay you are welcome all
right all right so it turns out that we
agree that's very very
annoying I love being annoying it's my
brand all right sir very good to talk to
you everyone watching and listening
today thank you very much it was a great
pleasure to Hash through these these
topics with Michael and I hope that you
you enjoyed let's say our walk through
the terrifying consequences of a
dogmatic utopian State and took to heart
the fact that that that is so dangerous
that to call it unimaginable is correct
the the depths of horror that were
produced in places like the Soviet Union
are enough to turn you inside out if you
have the barest comprehension of what
happened and the notion that that could
be in any wise attractive is I think
it's the most terrifying thing that I
can apprehend and then the question
starts to become you know what's the
alternative to that and is there an
alternative to totalitarianism and
misery in the final analysis you know
and our conversation today revolved
around the notion that whatever that
might be it definitely has something to
do with iterability and voluntary asset
and you know those are those aren't
merely subjective claims and that takes
you out of the domain of an idiot moral
relativism but idiot moral relativism
that makes all things permitted you know
everything permitted in the dovi iness
so all right good thank you everyone for
paying attention and and following this
and to the Daily wire people for making
this possible for Michael melis for
showing up today and and being able to
do this live with me that's a great uh
privilege as far as I'm concerned and so
uh now we'll flip over to the dailywire
plus side and I'm going to talk to
Michael a bit on the autobiographical
side talk to him about his future plans
as well and if you want to join us there
please please feel free to do
[Music]
so